Rewrite the user-guide page for local usage (#120)
IAMconsortium/nomenclature: doc/source/user_guide/local-usage.rst

.. _local_usage:

.. currentmodule:: nomenclature

Local usage of a project
========================

.. attention:: This page is intended for users who are familiar with Python and
    `git <https://git-scm.com>`_ (or a service like `GitHub <https://github.com>`_).

You can use the **nomenclature** package locally (on your machine) for validation
and region-aggregration. This can be helpful as part of processing your model results,

> or to ensure that a submission to an IIASA Scenario Explorer instance will succeed.

Author: you sure?

> or to ensure that a submission to an IIASA Scenario Explorer instance will succeed.

Reviewer: Had to think about it again myself and I'm pretty sure since it's about the sound of the following word and not the letter (https://www.britannica.com/dictionary/eb/qa/how-do-you-know-whether-to-use-a-or-an). But it kinda depends on how to pronounce IIASA ...

> or to ensure that a submission to an IIASA Scenario Explorer instance will succeed.

Reviewer: Ah right, yes in that case you're correct. I was thinking of pronouncing it like "year" in which case "a" would be correct. In any case I'd say it's fine to leave as is.

Requirements
------------

1. Install the **nomenclature** package (see the :ref:`installation` instructions)
2. Have a project folder that has the required :ref:`dir_structure`:

>    * Set up the folder with the required structure and files yourself, or

Author: There is a reference just above this line (because it applies to both options)

>    * Set up the folder with the required structure and files yourself, or

Reviewer: Ah sorry, overlooked that.

   * Clone the git repository for a specific project
     (e.g., `openENTRANCE <https://github.com/openENTRANCE/openentrance>`_)

   .. attention:: When using a project repository from GitHub or a similar service,

>           make sure that you keep your local clone in sync with the upstream repository.

Author: The alternative would be to reuse "project repository", which is also not ideal...

>           make sure that you keep your local clone in sync with the upstream repository.

Reviewer: True, and I guess that people that are able to clone a repository should be familiar with the concept of upstream. Fine to leave then.

Usage options
-------------

Validation against the codelists
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The easiest use case is to validate that a data file or an :class:`IamDataFrame <pyam.IamDataFrame>`
is compatible with the codelists (lists of variables and regions) of a project's
:class:`DataStructureDefinition`.

> If the :func:`process` function returns an :class:`IamDataFrame <pyam.IamDataFrame>`,

Reviewer: Since this example is talking about validation only maybe we should stress that the dataframe is returned unchanged.
```suggestion
If there are any inconsistencies with the codelists an error will be raised, otherwise the :class:`IamDataFrame <pyam.IamDataFrame>` is returned unchanged.
```
or something along those lines.

the validation was successful. Otherwise, it will raise an error with details.

.. code-block:: python

  import pyam
  from nomenclature import DataStructureDefinition, process

  # Initialize the DataStructureDefinition from a suitable directory
  dsd = DataStructureDefinition("definitions")

  # Read the data using pyam
  df = pyam.IamDataFrame("/path/to/file")

  # Perform the validation

>   df = process(df, dsd)

Reviewer: For demonstrating just validation maybe using `DataStructureDefinition.validate()` would be more straightforward. On the other hand using the `process` function throughout for **both** validation and the complete processing also has its advantages.

Validation and region processing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A more elaborate use case is to perform validation against the codelists and use the
:class:`RegionProcessor` to aggregate timeseries from "native regions" of a model to

> "common regions" (i.e., regions that are used for scenario comparison in a project).

Reviewer: Maybe add that region-processing can also include native region renaming.

Author: Added a link to the region-processing docs-page.

.. code-block:: python

  # Import the necessary libraries
  import pyam
  from nomenclature import DataStructureDefinition, RegionProcessor, process
  
  # Initialize a DataStructureDefinition from a suitable directory
  dsd = DataStructureDefinition("definitions")
  
  # Initialize a RegionProcessor from a suitable directory that has the mappings
  rp = RegionProcessor.from_directory("mappings")
  
  # Read the data using pyam
  df = pyam.IamDataFrame("/path/to/file")
  
  # Perform the validation and apply the region aggregation
  df = process(df, dsd, processor=rp)

Using a project-specific workflow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Several projects specify custom workflows that combine validation and region-processing
with other validation steps or post-processing modules. These workflows are usually

> implemented as a ``main()`` function in ``workflow.py`` of a project repository.

Reviewer: You could add here that you have to be located in the same directory as `workflow.py` for the code below to work.

Author: Added a warning
